# PREMIX & Command Line Basics

Week 1 goals are to orient to the PREMIX study and get comfortable working on the server.

---

## PREMIX (20 Minutes)

Background with some sample naming conventions are listed at [this site](https://github.com/michaelwoodworth/PREMIX/blob/main/docs/background.md) in the PREMIX repo.

Data for the analyses in the PREMIX paper that will be used for this repository are available through the NCBI Bioproject (accession PRJNA728680). Selected files for our purposes have been shared through OneDrive.

---

## Unix Shell Computing (30 Minutes)
(Adapted from [Software Carpentry](https://swcarpentry.github.io/shell-novice/))
(See also: [CHSL Unix Intro](https://rnabio.org/module-00-setup/0000/08/01/Unix/) hat tip to Babiker)

Shell syntax is:
- case sensitive
- flexible to absolute or relative paths
- can often be auto-completed with tab

commands
``` console
ls
pwd
/
*
?
.
..
clear
man
--help
cd
cd ..
cd -
cd ~
mkdir
rm
```

### General command syntax

`ls` is the **command**, with **option** `-l` and an **argument** `/`.

### Naming files and directories

- Spaces aren't allowed
- Common to use `CamelHumpLettering`, `Underscore_delimited_names`, or `period.delimited.names`
- Extensions don't have special meaning in Unix

### Editing files in command line

``` console
mkdir 99.lists
cd 99.lists
nano 22.03.10-SRA_IDs.txt
```

Nano commands
- `Ctrl + o`: save
- `Ctrl + x`: quit
- `Ctrl + x`: line number

Other file-manipulation commands
``` console
touch
mv
cp
rename
rm -i
cat
echo
>
>>
less
more
head
tail
history
wc
|
chmod
ln
which
```

### Managing jobs

``` console
free
top
ps
jobs
kill
&
fg
```
---

## Package Management

Conda (and it's newer faster version Mamba) is one of the most common package management tools.

- [Install miniconda](https://docs.conda.io/en/latest/miniconda.html)
- [Install mamba](https://github.com/mamba-org/mamba)

Conda commands
- `conda create --name environment`: create an environment
- `conda activate environment`: activate an environment
- `conda install -c channel package`: install a package

---

## tmux

tmux facilitates running longer jobs without needing to maintain an open terminal session. It has a fairly steep learning curve but has a lot of features for the motivated user.

``` console
conda install -c conda-forge tmux
```


---

## File Transfer

Files can be uploaded or downloaded from the server using ssh and your login credentials while logged into the Emory VPN.

Over command line, this is done with tools like rsync or scp.

Files can also be transferred with GUI applications like [cyberduck](https://cyberduck.io) etc.

---

## For loops

Powerful tool to repeat a set of commands over a list.

Basic syntax:
``` console
for thing in list_of_things
do
  operation_using $thing  #indentation isn't required, just aids human readibility
done
```

---

## Week 2 prep (5 minutes)

Next week, we will work on quality control for metagenome reads using FastQC, trimmomatic, and human read decontamination. To prepare for next week, let's:

- Read the Trimmomatic paper
- create environments and install fastqc, trimmomatic, biobakery
- run FastQC, trimmomatic, and decontaminate human reads with bmtagger or kneaddata for baseline samples for PM06
