# Introduction to Python

Week 13 goals are to introduce features of python that can be useful for writing custom scripts to handle output from bioinformatic tools.

By now you surely have noticed that nearly every data science tool produces its own set of results, which are almost never formatted in the same structure. There are rare exceptions to this (we have seen use of the biom format in the kraken2 introduction, and who doesn't love the tabular blast output format FMT6?). One way to handle this is to proactively define structures and try to wrangle every tool and resut to a larger platform (e.g. QIIME2, Anvi'o, etc). As we've seen, this can be a little constrictive when you want to customize something for your uses.

Alternatively, we can take a step back and be prepared to handle this ourselves. In the long run, this is likely to be a stronger approach and will also help you become better acquainted with the actual results and assumptions these tools are making.

We clearly aren't going to learn python in a week but our goal is to point to some very accessible resources to get started using python and to highlight some valuable uses. If you haven't started using R yet, you may find that you can do almost anything in Python that you might want to do in R.

## Software Carpentry

Software carpentry has a nice set of lessons for GitHub, R, and Python.

Work through [their Python tutorial](https://swcarpentry.github.io/python-novice-inflammation/) for a useful introduction to key syntax.

## Python Libraries

### pandas & numpy

These are two of the most commonly used libraries for statistics in python, see [https://numpy.org](https://numpy.org)

### seaborn

[Seaborn](https://seaborn.pydata.org) is to python what ggplot2 is to R. It comes with beautiful visualization options and colors.

### Biopython

Take a look at [Biopython](https://biopython.org), and particularly their [cookbook](http://biopython.org/DIST/docs/tutorial/Tutorial.html#sec7) which is a sprawling resource for lots of the basic functional units you may find yourself needing. With the biopython library, you can count sequences in a fasta file, create a dictionary of protein names produced in a prodigal file, translate to amino acids, and parse until the cows come home.

### Argparse

[Argparse](https://docs.python.org/3/howto/argparse.html) is a powerful python library that makes it much easier to structure arguments for your python scripts. It lets you specify defaults, help text, expected input types, optional arguments etc.

## Exercises

1. Write a python script that accepts a tsv output file from AMRFinder, filters only AMR results (i.e. excludes stress or virulence genes), and writes a new tsv file.
2. Write a python script that parses gene coverage from an inStrain gene_info.tsv file, AMRFinder gene annotation and gene length results, and writes a new tsv file.
3. `IF YOU HAVE NOTHING TO DO` Write a python script that parses MicrobeCensus output for several files and writes a new tsv. 
4. `IF YOU HAVE NOTHING TO DO` Write a python script that upgrades the script from Ex. 2 but normalizes gene gene coverage depth to gene length and genome equivalents in your metagenome.

## Live in the Now

If you have a ChatGPT account, try asking it to write these python scripts for you and create a generalizable script that can accept the appropriate output files.

## Week 14 prep (5 minutes)

Next week, we will each make a brief 5-10 presentation applying something from this course.
