# Introduction to Diversity Analyses

Week 4 goals are to understand the tools and steps involved in calculating alpha and diversity measures.

You will want to try to create these files on your own, but for efficiency I have uploaded files from the expected output from last week:

- [PM06_combined_Bracken_G.tsv](PM06_combined_Bracken_G.tsv): Combined output of genus level Bracken results
- [PM06_combined_Bracken_S.tsv](PM06_combined_Bracken_S.tsv): Combined output of species level Bracken results
- [PM06_mg_S-biom.json](PM06_mg_S-biom.json): Biom formatted output of species level Bracken results
- [Sample data / Metadata](PM06_metadata.tsv): Data for PM06 metagenomes and FMT dose

## 1. vegan and phyloseq package documentation

[Diversity analysis in vegan](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/vegan/vignettes/diversity-vegan.pdf)
[phyloseq full stack](https://f1000research.com/articles/5-1492/v1)

## 2. Alpha Diversity

Alpha diversity measures are ways to quantify how much diversity there is **within a sample**. Richness is probably the simplest diversity measure, which is just a count of distinct features. Evenness is a measure of how similar in distribution each feature is. Alpha diversity indices are mathematical summaries that incorporate each of these measures with different assumptions or weights. Many studies report the Shannon or Inverse Simpson diversity indices. Alpha diversity measures allow us to quantify changes in diversity within a sample after some exposure (e.g. antibiotics, FMT, etc).

- Using the vegan package in R, calculate alpha diversity (richness, Shannon and Inverse Simpson indices) for each PM06 sample
- Using ggplot in R, plot trends for alpha diversity for PM06
- Did alpha diversity change after FMT?

## 3. Beta Diversity

Beta diversity measures are ways to quantify how much diversity there is **between samples**. They often are also described as dissimilarity or distance metrics but allow us to answer how different samples are in terms of feature richness (counts of features) and evenness (distribution of reatures). Bray-Curtis dissimilarty is one of the most commonly used metrics, which accounts for both richness and evenness. Another commonly used distance metric is the Jaccard distance, which just compares sample richness, which is useful for detection/presence-absence data when you don't have an estimate of abundance/feature counts.

Results of beta diversity calculations are often summarized as matrices and compared with dimensionality reduction plotting approaches, which we will discuss next week. Another way to compare diversity trends is to plot trends of dissimilarity between samples over time (e.g. PM06 vs SD01).

- Using the vegan package in R, create a bray-curtis dissimilarity matrix for all samples
- Using ggplot in R, plot trends in bray-curtis dissimilarity between PM06 and SD01 over time
- Did PM06 become more or less similar to the donor after FMT?

## 4. Phyloseq

Work through the phyloseq tutorial materials with the .biom import as a starting point to create a phyloseq data object with the PM06 samples.

- Import the biom file 
- Recreate diversity plots from 2. and 3. above in phyloseq

## Week 5 prep (5 minutes)

Next week, we will work on dimensionality reduction. To prepare for next week, let's:

- Review [Phyloseq](https://joey711.github.io/phyloseq/index.html) R package
- Look into pluses and minuses of tsne and other dimensionality reduction approaches
